---
title: On notes apps
date: 2025-01-01
wip: true
---
<!-- vim: set tw=72 wrapmargin=0 formatoptions+=t -->

My early 20s have been a lot.<sup><em>[citation needed]</em></sup>
Adjusting to moving back to the Bay, building a support network and
finding my folks here, navigating maintaining long-distance friendships,
figuring out questions around my identity and all of its
dimensions---cultural, work, and otherwise... it's a lot to navigate,
and it can feel very overwhelming at times.

On top of that, this late-stage capitalism shit sucks ass, and
finding space for joy and leisure while bearing (witness to) the
mundane, everyday violences of white supremacy, capitalism, and
colonialism is a lot. Existing is fucking *hard*.

In these trying times, my silly little notes apps are how I keep myself
sane :^)

I care a lot about notes and todo list apps. I get overwhelmed and
overstimulated *real* easily, and I need a way of keeping all my ducks
in a row, of keeping track of all the things happening within and around
me.

<aside>
    <img src="./ss1.png" alt="A picture of my current notes system." />
    <p class="mt-2 lg:mr-[1.15vw]">
        A picture of my notes and tasks about this website!
    </p>
</aside>

- I often have tasks I need to get done, whether for work (class
  assignments, research tasks, prep for meetings) or in my personal life
  (errands I have to run, things I need to do for my hobbies, random
  one-off tasks people ask me to do).
  - It's very easy for me to feel overwhelmed by the amount of work I
    have to do---that there are an infinite amount of things I need to
    do, and an infinite amount of things I need to do *that I don't know
    about*.
  - Keeping track of these tasks and when they need to be finished by
    helps calm my anxiety around all the things I need to do---it helps
    to see that my list of todos is finite, that everything I need to do
    can be listed out in one place, and isn't never-ending or infinite.
  - These big tasks often involve lots of little tasks I need to take
    care of too. If I have a task for "finding a therapist," that might
    involve researching lists of therapists, contacting therapists
    individually and scheduling times to meet, keeping track of who I
    have and haven't replied to for each therapist, and so on. 
  - Being able to break down big tasks into reasonable, bite-sized
    chunks helps make me feel less daunted by the scale of the tasks
    ahead of me.
- Because I'm so scatterbrained, I'm also a chronic sufferer of Oh God I
  Double Booked Myself Syndrome, and I need a way of keeping track of
  all events and commitments.
  - Between blocking out time for spending time with friends, hobbies,
    and work meetings I'm (not) obligated to show up at, if I don't know
    when I'm busy and when I'm not, I just get this constant low-grade
    anxiety about if I'm accidentally scheduling over someone else's
    time, and then I have to go out and resolve it and ... it's just a
    mess :,)
  - I also find that on a day-to-day, I work better when I'm able to do
    detailed timeblocking for myself---allocating specific time for
    working on specific tasks, rather than just having a general todo
    list for "things I need to do at some point at some day." This also
    requires knowing when I'll have time and when I'll be engaged in
    some commitment.
  - So I also need to be able to keep track of calendar events I
    guess...
- And I find notetaking super important too!
  - Sometimes these are notes I take in an academic context, either on a
    class or some other [readings that I happen to be
    doing](https://pl-notes.cao.sh)
  - Sometimes these are short, one-off journals---when a thought appears
    in my head or I'm trying to process some feeling, and I want to
    capture exactly how I'm articulating those feelings to myself in
    that moment.
  - But other times, these journals are much longer.
- And I want to be able to connect all these different parts of my life
  together too!
  - A particular project---say, this website, might be both a personal
    and a research-related endeavor, and should be reachable from both
    those contexts
  - A lot of my journals have to do with (and should be able to
    reference) the other parts of my life that I have notes and todos on
  - Concepts from different academic disciplines may share resonances
    with one another, and I want to be able to explicitly note that!
    - It's giving ✨interdisciplinary✨
  - These concepts might even have resonances with my own personal life
    (this is more common with the humanities side of things).

In general, I think it's super interesting looking into the kinds of
ways folks make sense of their thoughts and their lives. The systems are
deeply personal things---folks are putting their deepest and darkest
secrets in the Apple Notes app as we speak. The systems folks use to
take notes, to keep track of things to do---these are a reification of
how they see the world!

# The perfect notes system

For me, I need some kind of *external brain*, a way to
externalize all the thinking and stress and obligations and emotional
processing involved in life into some kind of outside thing, so that
I can both make space for processing and productivity, while also being
present while I'm living my life.

In short, I want a system that can do *everything*. 

I want an *infinite outliner* that lets me hierarchically structure
information and break down tasks and ideas into manageable, anxiety-free
chunks: a system that lets me see the overall structure of my second
brain for easy access---to let me see the big picture---but also lets me
dive into details wherever I'd like, at a moment's notice. But I also
want a non-linear, non-hierarchical, *interlinked knowledge base*, a
personal wiki with wiki-style backlinks which I can use to build a
deeply linked knowledge graph, a complex and flexible system that can
mirror the complex, non-hierarchical, fluid structure of my brain. I
want to be able to identify resonances within the multitudes I
contain---my relationships, my hobbies, my academic studies, my
work---because these things all relate to one-another! I'm a complex
person that contains multitudes, and I want my notes system to be able
to hold all that and help me deepen that.

In other words, I want a notes system as simple, effortless, freeform,
and post-it like as Apple Notes or Google Keep; yet as structured and
rigid as a real-life Bullet Journal.

I also want a single source of truth that can hold my notes, along with
tasks and events associated with each of those notes. I want to be able
to add a quick personal task at a moment's notice, time block for the
day or pencil in hangout time in the future, or break down and plan out
research tasks and meeting notes, and their associated due dates, right
from within the notes about that research.

And these things are inseparable---if I want notes and tasks all
interacting with one another, they need to all be in the same place. I
want a world-class todo list and a world-class calendar inside my
world-class notes app.

I want an app that's downright fun to use, one that makes me *want* to
journal and manage my tasks, to use the app more and get more of my life
in check. I want an app that's beautiful to use and look at, and an app
that makes my notes and tasks look beautiful too, whether in-app or
exported in any number of formats, like PDFs or webpages. I want an app
that's lightweight, fast, and responsive, one that can deal with massive
files with ease. There should be no latency from thought to note.

Part of no latency means having this system with me at all times,
wherever I go. I want this whole system on my phone. No friction. No
compromises. I want my full note-taking system accessible through my phone.

And I need total control and customization of this system. Notes systems
are deeply personal things---they are an extension of yourself, how you
think and how you see the world. I want my notes system to reflect me at
every level, from the way notes are organized and structured, all the
way down to the individual keyboard shortcuts that make the system
easier for me to use. I want a [home-cooked
tool](https://www.robinsloan.com/notes/home-cooked-app/), one that I
know inside and out because *I've customized it to my precise needs, to
my own brain*. I want to be able to make the system behave exactly as I
want it. Just as the note-taking system shapes me, I want to shape the
note-taking system.

And lastly, I want my notes to be able to outlast the system itself.
I want my notes to be *durable*, to be able to keep archives of my
memories, my thoughts, my feelings. My digital archives should be like a
photo book or a physical diary, something I can safeguard and look back
on, even if it's not something I'm explicitly thinking about in the
moment.

## This is not an endorsement of capitalism

One of the ✨silly and goofy✨ aspects of our capitalist hell is that it
sells you band-aid solutions that superficially address (but actually
worsen) the systemic violences it enacts. Feeling a deep sense of ennui
and alienation from your labor? Here's a meditation app you can
subscribe to! <span class="aside"> See <a
href="https://read.dukeupress.edu/south-atlantic-quarterly/article-abstract/120/2/325/173307/Reclaiming-the-Radical-Politics-of-Self-CareA-Crip?redirectedFrom=fulltext">"Reclaiming
the Radical Politics of Self-Care: A Crip-of-Color Critique"</a> by Jina
Kim and Sami Schalk for more on that last point. </span>

And so it goes with notes apps. 

These days, numerous companies and startups have popped out of the
woodwork, looking to sell you Free Time As A Service. These tools all
speak a particular kind of language, looking to ["optimize" your
schedule](https://reclaim.ai/) or
"[maximize](https://www.notion.com/use-case/time-management)
[productivity](https://www.usemotion.com/)."

<aside>
<p>
Obviously, this is not the case with <em>every</em> digital
organizational tool. However, this kind of framing and marketing does
tend to be particularly common with (1) tools marketed for business use,
and/or (2) tools backed by VC funding. Go figure!
</p>

<p>
There are certainly diversions from this kind of rhetoric.
For example, the use of the term <a href="https://maggieappleton.com/garden-history">"digital garden"</a>
to refer to personal wikis and knowledge bases is interesting. What
epistemic work is done when we analogize collecting knowledge to tending
to a garden&mdash;a personal practice and art that can be enjoyed for its
own sake? What does this <em>do</em>?
</p>

<p>
There are also exceptions to the "notes apps are services that lock away
your data for mysterious AI bullshit" rule;
<a href="https://obsidian.md">Obsidian</a> is the most obvious example, which we'll
get to soon ;)
</p>
</aside>

These are tools marketed as
ways to cope with the imperatives of capital, yet they are still
beholden to its syntax and semantics, seeing themselves as valuable only
insofar as they enable you to do more work or make creative output [more
dependable and reproducible](https://www.linkingyourthinking.com/), as
if we are all Henry Ford looking to assembly line our brains into order.
I am no longer a person trying to live an introspective, fulfilling, and
restful life. I'm a [*knowledge worker*](https://logseq.com/). We *all*
are, apparently.

These apps are full of the same Silicon Valley bullshit that has become
inescapable in the rest of our lives. All this info is stuck in whatever
bullshit cloud these companies want to lock my data away in, because
heaven forbid my data outlasts the 5 years these companies last before
their VC funding runs out. And why do I want AI turning my notes into
["actionable insights??"](https://www.notion.com/product/ai) What the
*fuck*?

Relatedly, a whole subculture of folks focused on "productivity" has
sprung up around these tools. Influencers show off their perfectly
curated Notions that they use to plan out their content schedule.
Academics and students on TikTok talking about how they use these tools,
proclaiming that this "one simple trick" got them all A's in their
classes.

## Joyful tools

I want to be very clear. I am not interested in valorizing productivity,
and I sure as hell don't want to *optimize* or *maximize* anything.

I don't want my tools to let me do more work. I want my tools to bring
*joy* into my life! These are tools for facilitating
time for me to bring more joy in my life---doing things I enjoy and
spending time with folks I love. These are tools for finding space for
joy and leisure in the midst of the bullshit that is productivity
culture and capitalism.

The other part of that is that it should be a *joy to use the tool
itself*. It should feel *good* to take notes, to list out everything I
have to do and check it off one-by-one. It's hard to want to use the
system to get my life together, unless using the system *is itself*
motivating.

Good means a lot of little things. It means the tool should be fast and
responsive. I shouldn't need stable WiFi to use it. It should look
reasonably pretty, and it should produce reasonably pretty notes.

The most important part of "good," though, is that if the system doesn't
do something I want it to do, *I can fix it myself.* Keyboard shortcut
isn't doing what I expect it to do? I can add it myself. Do I have a
particular system for archiving old notes I want to use? Let me program
that into the tool. There is nothing as joyful as using a tool that
doesn't demand that I change for the tool, that just does what I expect
it to do, every time.

Because many of the aforementioned tools are hosted by other people, you
*cannot* meaningfully modify or customize them. Sure, you can decorate
your Notion with aesthetic images and a nice colorscheme, and if you're
enough of a Notion wizard, you can do some fun stuff with formulas and
all that. But fundamentally, what you can do in Notion is dictated by
the Notion developers. You have no access to the underlying system, its
code, or your data.

Tools for "productivity" adhere to the rhetorics of capital. Joyful
tools eschew these rhetorics and demand *materially* different
systems---systems that are introspectable and personal.

<!--
# A tour of the options

But enough pontificating! I've tried out a bunch of these different apps
over the years, and boy do I have some strong thoughts and feelings for
you.

## Baby steps: Evernote, OneNote

## The basics: Apple Notes, Google Keep

## org-mode

## Obsidian

# My system today

The system I have today has
-->
